seminario-fate_en.md, before:

---
#theme: gaia
#_class: lead
marp: true
paginate: true
#size: 4:3
---

<style>
img[alt~="center"] {
  display: block;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
</style>

<style>
blockquote {
    border-top: 0.1em dashed #555;
    font-size: 60%;
    margin-top: auto;
}
</style>

# Fairness, Accountability, Transparency and Ethics in Machine Learning.

### Introduction to Computational Modelling. Degree in Computer Engineering. University of Cordoba. 2025-2026

Javier Sánchez Monedero (Universidad de Córdoba)

--- 

![bg right fit](pics/Superior_Gort_Judge.jpg)

# Objectives


- Introduction and motivation to FATE in artificial intelligence

- Quantifying and mitigating bias: [FairLearn](https://fairlearn.org/)

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Introduction and motivation to FATE
--- 

# Where to start? Books

![h:13em ](pics/armas-destruccion-matematica.jpg) ![h:13em ](pics/book-data-feminism.jpg) ![h:13em ](pics/fairmlbook.png)

<!--
--- 

# ¿Por dónde empezar? Libros

![h:12em ](pics/armas-destruccion-matematica.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/AutomatingInequality.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/book-design-justice.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/fairmlbook.png)
-->
--- 

# Where to start? Video

![bg right fit](pics/coded_bias.jpg)

- Documentary [Coded Bias](https://www.codedbias.com/)
- TED Talk dy Joy Buolamwini [How I'm fighting bias in algorithms](https://www.ted.com/talks/joy_buolamwini_how_i_m_fighting_bias_in_algorithms)

---
# FATE

![bg right fit](pics/facctconference.png)

- **Fairness**
- **Accountability**
- **Transparency**
- **Ethics**

[facctconference.org](https://facctconference.org/)
[facctconference.org/network](https://facctconference.org/network/)

---
# Seminar objectives


Discrimination in **systems/models** that make/support decisions with human consecuences.

- This does not consider other forms of discrimination or injustice.

- Discrimination/equality issues need other kinds of non-technical interventions (see recommended books)


**Discrimination is not a general concept**, it depends: 

- Domain of the problem

- Social group


---
# Protected Groups

![bg right:40%](pics/Angela-Davis-copy.webp)

Protected classes (not in all contexts): 

- USA: "race", colour, gender, religion, religion, citizenship, pregnancy, age....

- Spain: gender, pregnancy, "race" (equal treatment law)...


The definition of protected groups goes further and includes the following categories [non-binary](https://www.genderbread.org/) and [intersectionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intersectionality)

> [There’s No Scientific Basis for Race—It’s a Made-Up Label](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2018/04/race-genetics-science-africa). National Geographic. 2018, March 12. 



<!--
Con el "pero" de lo difícil de expresar la pertenencia a grupo, es interesante [intersectionalityscore.com](https://intersectionalityscore.com/)

![bg right fit](pics/intersectionalityscore.png)-->

---
# Law on equal treatment and non-discrimination

[Artículo 23 Ley 15/2022, de 12 de julio](https://www.boe.es/buscar/doc.php?id=BOE-A-2022-11589): 

![](pics/articulo23.png)

---
# Risk based approach of AI Act

![h:16em](pics/aiact-levels.png)

> Source [Artificial intelligence act](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/artificial-intelligence/)

---
# ...but people also have biases

![w:12em](pics/futurama-judge-person.jpg) ![w:12em](pics/futurama-judge-robot.jpg)

Differences (O'Neil 2016): 

* Systematisation

* Scale

* New "digital" groups discriminated against

> O’Neil, C (2018). [Weapons of Math Destruction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weapons_of_Math_Destruction)

---
# Cases: NLP + Computer Vision

![h:20em center](pics/cv-gender-bias-4.png)

> Zhao, J. et. al (2017). [Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints.](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1319) 

---
# Case: facial recognition

Intersectional analysis of Amazon Rekognition face recognition performance. The lowest hit rate is for dark-skinned women. 

![h:12em](pics/amazon-recoknition.png)

> Fuente Buolamwini (2019). [Response: Racial and Gender bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces.](https://medium.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced)


---
# Case: justice

* **COMPAS** (*Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions*): tool for calculating recidivism risk scores for a person awaiting trial
* Uses ML to train a **risk estimation model from historical records**.
* **Input variables**: criminal history, type of charges, gender, ethnicity, age, environmental questions...
* **Dependent variable**: degree of risk, high degrees go to pre-trial detention.

---
# Case: justice

![h:14em center](pics/compas-two-cases.png)



> Angwin, J., & Larson, J. (2016, May 23). [Machine Bias](https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing). ProPublica. 

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A1. How would you quantify bias in the above problems?

![bg right:33% 50%](pics/questionmark.svg)

<!-- Penitenciario: "Predicción" riesgo de reincidencia: el sistema sobreestima el riesgo para afroamericanos en comparación con población blanca-->
* **Facial recognition**: the model is less accurate in identifying women with dark skin.

* **Justice**: the model overestimates the risk of recidivism for African-Americans

* **Natural language processing**: system reproduces gender stereotypes associated with professions

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Quantifying and mitigating bias

---
# How to measure and mitigate bias?

~~Fairness through *unawareness*~~

![center](pics/lol-fairness.svg)

Updated from [NIPS 2017 Tutorial on Fairness in Machine Learning](https://fairmlbook.org/tutorial1.html)

---
# Exploratory analysis

![bg right:33% fit](pics/analisis-preliminar.jpg)

- Check distribution (prevalence/prior) class label
- Check distribution (prevalence/priority) class label by groups
- Check: 
  - Visual
  - Descriptive statistics
  - Hypothesis testing

An excellent example can be found in Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022).

> Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022). Investigating for bias in healthcare algorithms: A sex-stratified analysis of supervised machine learning models in liver disease prediction. BMJ Health & Care Informatics, 29(1), e100457. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100457

<!--
# Definición formal
-->


--- 
# The "zoo" of fairness metrics

![h:14em center](pics/zoo-fairness-metrics.png)

> Castelnovo, A., Crupi, R., Greco, G. et al. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape. Sci Rep 12, 4209 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07939-1


---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A3. Judicial case

* Suppose a generic test (with or without statistical techniques) to estimate the risk of recidivism. What errors should we minimise?
* Regarding the class: what metrics are we interested in?
* What if the test involves loss of freedom?


---
# Cases: COMPAS

* **ProPublica**: the system discriminates because it overestimates the risk for African Americans (different false positive for the groups: 44.8% vs 23.4%).
* **Northpointe**: system does not discriminate because it classifies high risk equally (similar true positives for all ethnic groups: 63% vs. 59%)

> Larson, J., & Angwin, J. (2016, May 23). [How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm](https://www.propublica.org/article/how-we-analyzed-the-compas-recidivism-algorithm). ProPublica. 

---
# Cases: COMPAS

How can ProPublica's and Northpointe's mathematical definitions of fairness be compatible?

![center](pics/han_solo_bayes.jpeg)

> Source [Han Solo and Bayesian Priors](https://www.countbayesie.com/blog/2015/2/18/hans-solo-and-bayesian-priors)

---
# Cases: COMPAS

![bg right:43% fit](pics/black-vs-white-defendants-decile-scores-rot.png)

It is mathematically compatible because the a priori prevalence/baseline frequency/probability of the two groups is different (see Chouldechova (2017)).

> A. Chouldechova. Fair Prediction with Disparate Impact: A Study of Bias in Recidivism Prediction Instruments. Big Data, 5(2):153–163, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2016.0047 
---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A4. How can we mitigate bias?

![bg right fit](pics/proxies.jpg)

* We already have a measure of statistical bias.
* How could we mitigate?
* But first: **Does a statistical/algorithmic intervention make sense?**
 
---
# Bias mitigation techniques

![](pics/bias-datadriven-survey.png)

> Fuente Ntoutsi, E., Fafalios, P., Gadiraju, U., Iosifidis, V., Nejdl, W., Vidal, M.-E., … Staab, S. (2020). Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1356. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1356

  
<!-- ---
# Cases databases

![bg left fit](pics/automatingsociety-2020-comic.jpg)

![w:350px](pics/aw-logo.svg)

[Automating Society Report 2020](https://automatingsociety.algorithmwatch.org/report2020/spain)

![](pics/logo-oasi-trans-2.png)

[Observatory of Algorithms with Social Impact](https://eticasfoundation.org/oasi) -->

---
# ML tools for mitigation and explainability

![w:400px](pics/fairlearn_logo.svg)
https://fairlearn.org/

Alternatives: 

https://ai-fairness-360.org/

https://pair-code.github.io/what-if-tool/

---
# Jupyter lab notebook with FairLearn and COMPAS

- COMPAS general recidivism data
- Simplified version of ProPublica experiments
  
https://github.com/javism/seminariofate2025

<!--
---
# Heurísticas para cuantificar el sesgo: 

![](pics/fairness_tree.png)


> Fuente https://textbook.coleridgeinitiative.org/chap-bias.html#dealing-with-bias 

-->

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Summary and Conclusions


---
# Recap: bias sources

![h:18em center](pics/how_unfairness_happen.jpg)

> Source Luke Vilain.

---
# Summary

* The move from research prototypes to real applications of artificial intelligence has led to the emergence of many research lines
* Not only FATE: Robust AI, privacy in AI (federated learning, homeomorphic encryption...), human-machine interaction (HCI)...
* Areas involved according to context: ethics, law, politics ->  **Socio-technical systems!**
* Regulation (IA Act, GDPR, Rider Act, AESIA...) and standards (IEEE, ISO)
* Learning opportunities and better understanding of statistical problems and concepts.

<!-- 
---
# Oportunidades de aprendizaje e investigación

* Revisitar problemas desde otros puntos de vista
* Mejorar entendimiento de la inteligencia artificial y la estadística
* Trabajar con equipos interdisciplinares y diversos
* Trabajar con colectivos
  
-->
---
# Trabajos relacionados de AYRNA

## Explorar límites de precisión vs ecuanimidad

![bg right:23% fit](pics/pareto_frontier_propublica.png)

Valdivia, A., Sánchez‐Monedero, J., & Casillas, J. (2021). How fair can we go in machine learning? Assessing the boundaries of accuracy and fairness. *Int J Intel Sys*, 36(4), 1619–1643. https://doi.org/10.1002/int.22354


## Gender-Equity model for Liver Allocation

El grupo AYRNA, IMIBIC y otros centros trabajan en alternativas al MELD que no discriminen por género como estimador de riesgo de mortalidad en trasplantes hepáticos. https://gema-transplant.com/



---
# Trabajos relacionados de AYRNA

## Desarrollo Ley Rider

Guía práctica y herramienta sobre la obligación empresarial de información sobre el uso de algoritmos en el ámbito laboral. *Ministerio de Trabajo y Economía Social. Gobierno de España*. 2022. https://prensa.mites.gob.es/WebPrensa/noticias/laboral/detalle/4125

## Proyecto AlgoRace

Proyecto AlgoRace. Investigación sobre discriminación racial e inteligencia artificial. 2021-2024. https://algorace.org/

---
# Referencias (I)
<style scoped>
{
  font-size: 1.5em
}
</style>
- O’Neil, C (2018). Armas de destrucción matemática. Capitán Swing. https://capitanswing.com/libros/armas-de-destruccion-matematica/

- Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein (2020). Data Feminism. MIT Press. https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262044004/

- Solon Barocas and Moritz Hardt and Arvind Narayanan (2019). *Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and Opportunities*. http://www.fairmlbook.org

- Moritz Hardt (2020). *Fairness and Machine Learning* ([Part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Igq_S_7IfOU), [Part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oNVFQ9llPc)) (MLSS 2020)

- Zhao, J. et. al (2017). Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1319

- Buolamwini (2019). [Response: Racial and Gender bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces.](https://medium.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced)
  
---
# Referencias (II)
<style scoped>
{
  font-size: 1.5em
}
</style>

- Verna, E. C., & Lai, J. C. (2020). Time for Action to Address the Persistent Sex-Based Disparity in Liver Transplant Access. JAMA Surgery, 155(7), 545–547.https://doi.org10.1001/jamasurg.2020.1126

- Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022). Investigating for bias in healthcare algorithms: A sex-stratified analysis of supervised machine learning models in liver disease prediction. BMJ Health & Care Informatics, 29(1), e100457. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100457

- Castelnovo, A., Crupi, R., Greco, G. et al. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape. Sci Rep 12, 4209 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07939-1

- Ntoutsi, E., Fafalios, P., Gadiraju, U., Iosifidis, V., Nejdl, W., Vidal, M.-E., … Staab, S. (2020). Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1356. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1356

- A. Valdivia, C. Hyde-Vaamonde, J. García-Marcos. Judging the algorithm: A case study on the risk assessment tool for gender-based violence implemented in the Basque country. https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.03723

Commit message:

Added bias visualization and translated EU definition

seminario-fate_en.md, after:

---
#theme: gaia
#_class: lead
marp: true
paginate: true
#size: 4:3
---

<style>
img[alt~="center"] {
  display: block;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
</style>

<style>
blockquote {
    border-top: 0.1em dashed #555;
    font-size: 60%;
    margin-top: auto;
}
</style>

# Fairness, Accountability, Transparency and Ethics in Machine Learning.

### Introduction to Computational Modelling. Degree in Computer Engineering. University of Cordoba. 2025-2026

Javier Sánchez Monedero (Universidad de Córdoba)

--- 

![bg right fit](pics/Superior_Gort_Judge.jpg)

# Objectives


- Introduction and motivation to FATE in artificial intelligence

- Quantifying and mitigating bias: [FairLearn](https://fairlearn.org/)

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Introduction and motivation to FATE
--- 

# Where to start? Books

![h:13em ](pics/armas-destruccion-matematica.jpg) ![h:13em ](pics/book-data-feminism.jpg) ![h:13em ](pics/fairmlbook.png)

<!--
--- 

# ¿Por dónde empezar? Libros

![h:12em ](pics/armas-destruccion-matematica.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/AutomatingInequality.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/book-design-justice.jpg) ![h:12em ](pics/fairmlbook.png)
-->
--- 

# Where to start? Video

![bg right fit](pics/coded_bias.jpg)

- Documentary [Coded Bias](https://www.codedbias.com/)
- TED Talk dy Joy Buolamwini [How I'm fighting bias in algorithms](https://www.ted.com/talks/joy_buolamwini_how_i_m_fighting_bias_in_algorithms)

---
# FATE

![bg right fit](pics/facctconference.png)

- **Fairness**
- **Accountability**
- **Transparency**
- **Ethics**

[facctconference.org](https://facctconference.org/)
[facctconference.org/network](https://facctconference.org/network/)

---
# Seminar objectives


Discrimination in **systems/models** that make/support decisions with human consecuences.

- This does not consider other forms of discrimination or injustice.

- Discrimination/equality issues need other kinds of non-technical interventions (see recommended books)


**Discrimination is not a general concept**, it depends: 

- Domain of the problem

- Social group


---
# Protected Groups

![bg right:40%](pics/Angela-Davis-copy.webp)

Protected classes (not in all contexts): 

- USA: "race", colour, gender, religion, religion, citizenship, pregnancy, age....

- Spain: gender, pregnancy, "race" (equal treatment law)...


The definition of protected groups goes further and includes the following categories [non-binary](https://www.genderbread.org/) and [intersectionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intersectionality)

> [There’s No Scientific Basis for Race—It’s a Made-Up Label](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2018/04/race-genetics-science-africa). National Geographic. 2018, March 12. 



<!--
Con el "pero" de lo difícil de expresar la pertenencia a grupo, es interesante [intersectionalityscore.com](https://intersectionalityscore.com/)

![bg right fit](pics/intersectionalityscore.png)-->

---
# Law on equal treatment and non-discrimination

[Artículo 23 Ley 15/2022, de 12 de julio](https://www.boe.es/buscar/doc.php?id=BOE-A-2022-11589): 

![](pics/articulo23.png)

---
# Risk based approach of AI Act

![h:16em](pics/aiact-levels.png)

> Source [Artificial intelligence act](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/artificial-intelligence/)

---
# Definición de IA del RIA (*AI Act*)

The EU Artificial Intelligence Act: "*‘AI system’ means a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments;*" (Article 3.1)

> European Commission, [Guidelines on the definition of an artificial intelligence system established by the AI Act](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/es/library/commission-publishes-guidelines-ai-system-definition-facilitate-first-ai-acts-rules-application) 2024/1689 (AI Act), Brussels, 29.7.2025 (C(2025) 5053 final).

---
# ...but people also have biases

![w:09em](pics/futurama-judge-person.jpg) ![w:09em](pics/futurama-judge-robot.jpg)

Differences (O'Neil 2016): 

* Systematisation

* Scale

* New "digital" groups discriminated against

> O’Neil, C (2018). [Weapons of Math Destruction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weapons_of_Math_Destruction)

---
# Cases: NLP + Computer Vision

![h:16em center](pics/cv-gender-bias-4.png)

> Zhao, J. et. al (2017). [Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints.](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1319) 

---
# Case: facial recognition

Intersectional analysis of Amazon Rekognition face recognition performance. The lowest hit rate is for dark-skinned women. 

![h:12em](pics/amazon-recoknition.png)

> Fuente Buolamwini (2019). [Response: Racial and Gender bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces.](https://medium.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced)


---
# Case: justice

* **COMPAS** (*Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions*): tool for calculating recidivism risk scores for a person awaiting trial
* Uses ML to train a **risk estimation model from historical records**.
* **Input variables**: criminal history, type of charges, gender, ethnicity, age, environmental questions...
* **Dependent variable**: degree of risk, high degrees go to pre-trial detention.

---
# Case: justice

![h:14em center](pics/compas-two-cases.png)



> Angwin, J., & Larson, J. (2016, May 23). [Machine Bias](https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing). ProPublica. 

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A1. How would you quantify bias in the above problems?

![bg right:33% 50%](pics/questionmark.svg)

<!-- Penitenciario: "Predicción" riesgo de reincidencia: el sistema sobreestima el riesgo para afroamericanos en comparación con población blanca-->
* **Facial recognition**: the model is less accurate in identifying women with dark skin.

* **Justice**: the model overestimates the risk of recidivism for African-Americans

* **Natural language processing**: system reproduces gender stereotypes associated with professions

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Quantifying and mitigating bias

---
# How to measure and mitigate bias?

~~Fairness through *unawareness*~~

![center](pics/lol-fairness.svg)

Updated from [NIPS 2017 Tutorial on Fairness in Machine Learning](https://fairmlbook.org/tutorial1.html)

---
# Exploratory analysis

![bg right:33% fit](pics/analisis-preliminar.jpg)

- Check distribution (prevalence/prior) class label
- Check distribution (prevalence/priority) class label by groups
- Check: 
  - Visual
  - Descriptive statistics
  - Hypothesis testing

An excellent example can be found in Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022).

> Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022). Investigating for bias in healthcare algorithms: A sex-stratified analysis of supervised machine learning models in liver disease prediction. BMJ Health & Care Informatics, 29(1), e100457. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100457

<!--
# Definición formal
-->


--- 
# The "zoo" of fairness metrics (for classification)

![h:14em center](pics/zoo-fairness-metrics.png)

> Castelnovo, A., Crupi, R., Greco, G. et al. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape. Sci Rep 12, 4209 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07939-1


---
# Bias visualization 
![h:16em](pics/bias-visualization.png)

> Zhao, J. et. al (2017). [Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints.](https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1319) 

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A3. Judicial case

* Suppose a generic test (with or without statistical techniques) to estimate the risk of recidivism. What errors should we minimise?
* Regarding the class: what metrics are we interested in?
* What if the test involves loss of freedom?


---
# Cases: COMPAS

* **ProPublica**: the system discriminates because it overestimates the risk for African Americans (different false positive for the groups: 44.8% vs 23.4%).
* **Northpointe**: system does not discriminate because it classifies high risk equally (similar true positives for all ethnic groups: 63% vs. 59%)

> Larson, J., & Angwin, J. (2016, May 23). [How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm](https://www.propublica.org/article/how-we-analyzed-the-compas-recidivism-algorithm). ProPublica. 

---
# Cases: COMPAS

How can ProPublica's and Northpointe's mathematical definitions of fairness be compatible?

![center](pics/han_solo_bayes.jpeg)

> Source [Han Solo and Bayesian Priors](https://www.countbayesie.com/blog/2015/2/18/hans-solo-and-bayesian-priors)

---
# Cases: COMPAS

![bg right:43% fit](pics/black-vs-white-defendants-decile-scores-rot.png)

It is mathematically compatible because the a priori prevalence/baseline frequency/probability of the two groups is different (see Chouldechova (2017)).

> A. Chouldechova. Fair Prediction with Disparate Impact: A Study of Bias in Recidivism Prediction Instruments. Big Data, 5(2):153–163, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2016.0047 
---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "darkgreen" -->
<!-- _color: "cornsilk" -->
# A4. How can we mitigate bias?

![bg right fit](pics/proxies.jpg)

* We already have a measure of statistical bias.
* How could we mitigate?
* But first: **Does a statistical/algorithmic intervention make sense?**
 
---
# Bias mitigation techniques

![](pics/bias-datadriven-survey.png)

> Fuente Ntoutsi, E., Fafalios, P., Gadiraju, U., Iosifidis, V., Nejdl, W., Vidal, M.-E., … Staab, S. (2020). Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1356. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1356

  
<!-- ---
# Cases databases

![bg left fit](pics/automatingsociety-2020-comic.jpg)

![w:350px](pics/aw-logo.svg)

[Automating Society Report 2020](https://automatingsociety.algorithmwatch.org/report2020/spain)

![](pics/logo-oasi-trans-2.png)

[Observatory of Algorithms with Social Impact](https://eticasfoundation.org/oasi) -->

---
# ML tools for mitigation and explainability

![w:400px](pics/fairlearn_logo.svg)
https://fairlearn.org/

Alternatives: 

https://ai-fairness-360.org/

https://pair-code.github.io/what-if-tool/

---
# Jupyter lab notebook with FairLearn and COMPAS

- COMPAS general recidivism data
- Simplified version of ProPublica experiments
  
https://github.com/javism/seminariofate2025

<!--
---
# Heurísticas para cuantificar el sesgo: 

![](pics/fairness_tree.png)


> Fuente https://textbook.coleridgeinitiative.org/chap-bias.html#dealing-with-bias 

-->

---
<!-- _backgroundColor: "#123" -->
<!-- _color: "#fff" -->
##### <!--fit--> Summary and Conclusions


---
# Recap: bias sources

![h:18em center](pics/how_unfairness_happen.jpg)

> Source Luke Vilain.

---
# Summary

* The move from research prototypes to real applications of artificial intelligence has led to the emergence of many research lines
* Not only FATE: Robust AI, privacy in AI (federated learning, homeomorphic encryption...), human-machine interaction (HCI)...
* Areas involved according to context: ethics, law, politics ->  **Socio-technical systems!**
* Regulation (IA Act, GDPR, Rider Act, AESIA...) and standards (IEEE, ISO)
* Learning opportunities and better understanding of statistical problems and concepts.

<!-- 
---
# Oportunidades de aprendizaje e investigación

* Revisitar problemas desde otros puntos de vista
* Mejorar entendimiento de la inteligencia artificial y la estadística
* Trabajar con equipos interdisciplinares y diversos
* Trabajar con colectivos
  
-->
---
# Trabajos relacionados de AYRNA

## Explorar límites de precisión vs ecuanimidad

![bg right:23% fit](pics/pareto_frontier_propublica.png)

Valdivia, A., Sánchez‐Monedero, J., & Casillas, J. (2021). How fair can we go in machine learning? Assessing the boundaries of accuracy and fairness. *Int J Intel Sys*, 36(4), 1619–1643. https://doi.org/10.1002/int.22354


## Gender-Equity model for Liver Allocation

El grupo AYRNA, IMIBIC y otros centros trabajan en alternativas al MELD que no discriminen por género como estimador de riesgo de mortalidad en trasplantes hepáticos. https://gema-transplant.com/



---
# Trabajos relacionados de AYRNA

## Desarrollo Ley Rider

Guía práctica y herramienta sobre la obligación empresarial de información sobre el uso de algoritmos en el ámbito laboral. *Ministerio de Trabajo y Economía Social. Gobierno de España*. 2022. https://prensa.mites.gob.es/WebPrensa/noticias/laboral/detalle/4125

## Proyecto AlgoRace

Proyecto AlgoRace. Investigación sobre discriminación racial e inteligencia artificial. 2021-2024. https://algorace.org/

---
# Referencias (I)
<style scoped>
{
  font-size: 1.5em
}
</style>
- O’Neil, C (2018). Armas de destrucción matemática. Capitán Swing. https://capitanswing.com/libros/armas-de-destruccion-matematica/

- Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein (2020). Data Feminism. MIT Press. https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262044004/

- Solon Barocas and Moritz Hardt and Arvind Narayanan (2019). *Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and Opportunities*. http://www.fairmlbook.org

- Moritz Hardt (2020). *Fairness and Machine Learning* ([Part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Igq_S_7IfOU), [Part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oNVFQ9llPc)) (MLSS 2020)

- Zhao, J. et. al (2017). Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Amplification using Corpus-level Constraints. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1319

- Buolamwini (2019). [Response: Racial and Gender bias in Amazon Rekognition — Commercial AI System for Analyzing Faces.](https://medium.com/@Joy.Buolamwini/response-racial-and-gender-bias-in-amazon-rekognition-commercial-ai-system-for-analyzing-faces-a289222eeced)
  
---
# Referencias (II)
<style scoped>
{
  font-size: 1.5em
}
</style>

- Verna, E. C., & Lai, J. C. (2020). Time for Action to Address the Persistent Sex-Based Disparity in Liver Transplant Access. JAMA Surgery, 155(7), 545–547.https://doi.org10.1001/jamasurg.2020.1126

- Straw, I., & Wu, H. (2022). Investigating for bias in healthcare algorithms: A sex-stratified analysis of supervised machine learning models in liver disease prediction. BMJ Health & Care Informatics, 29(1), e100457. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2021-100457

- Castelnovo, A., Crupi, R., Greco, G. et al. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape. Sci Rep 12, 4209 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07939-1

- Ntoutsi, E., Fafalios, P., Gadiraju, U., Iosifidis, V., Nejdl, W., Vidal, M.-E., … Staab, S. (2020). Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1356. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1356

- A. Valdivia, C. Hyde-Vaamonde, J. García-Marcos. Judging the algorithm: A case study on the risk assessment tool for gender-based violence implemented in the Basque country. https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.03723
